Stargate upgrade proposal (#5)
cosmos/governance: proposals/2021-01-stargate-upgrade/README.md

# Cosmos Stargate Hub Upgrade Proposal 2: Chevrons Locked. Time to Upgrade

![Stargate Upgrade banner graphic](https://siasky.net/AADU5rg0GvapbrICLUk7SxZeMDrKo5Q8oLrpOwl71wXhnQ)

## by Iqlusion

Jan 11, 2021

## Key Results

------------
If passed, this governance proposal would commit the Cosmos Hub to halting the `cosmoshub-3` at 06:00 UTC on Jan 28th exporting the state and starting `cosmoshub-4` based on gaia 3.0.

## Context

------------

In proposal 27, Iqlusion proposed a comprehensive process to translate the unprecented surface area of this upgrade. We called this process Stargate.

Iqlusion is pleased to report that the Stargate Process has been successfully executed. We believe the chevrons are unlocked and that Hub can safely step through the Stargate.

After the success of the community approval of the first Stargate Upgrade proposal, we now follow-up with the second Stargate proposal for the Cosmos Hub that will outline the results of the first proposal and the process for upgrading the Hub.

## The Stargate Plan

------------

> The purpose of the Stargate effort was to ensure that Cosmos can fulfill the vision of an Internet of Blockchains in 2021 while mitigating the risks outlined above. It was also an attempt to create a process for complex future on-chain upgrades on the Cosmos Hub. That included the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of the Stargate effort was to ensure that Cosmos can fulfill the vision of an Internet of Blockchains in 2021 while mitigating the technological and organizational risks outlined in the [original Stargate Upgrade Proposal 27](https://ipfs.io/ipfs/Qmbo3fF54tX3JdoHZNVLcSBrdkXLie56Vh2u29wLfs4PnW). It was also an attempt to create a process for complex future on-chain upgrades on the Cosmos Hub. That included the following steps:
```

### 3. Documentation and Self-Certification

Documentation was a success for the Cosmos Stargate effort. The upgrades with the most breaking changes such as legacy Amino have a complete audit with documentation on exceptions for blockchain API interfaces.

Most exchanges and wallets have taken self-certification on directly. Our team continues to provide real-time support on multiple partner slack channels and on the Cosmos [#stargate Discord](https://discord.gg/W8trcGV) channel.

We have conducted numerous testnets with different partners. A particularly important testnet conducted with a significant fraction of the Hub validator set was a simulated upgrade of the cosmoshub on Nov 25th,2020. This tested the full upgrade flow including the prop29 implementation and height preserving upgrade functionality.

### Cosmos Stargate Integration Success

Cosmos Stargate integration success with exchanges and wallet providers reflects the quality of the code developed by the various Cosmos teams.

## Prop 29

> This upgrade also implements the fund recovery procedure defined in proposal 29. The code is [here](https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/blob/main/app/prop29.go). As requested during the discussion of the governance proposal, the migration and fund recovery procedure verifies all signatures. This code was tested during the cosmoshub-3 simulated upgrade testnet.ƒ

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This upgrade also implements the fund recovery procedure defined in proposal 29. The code is [here](https://github.com/cosmos/gaia/blob/main/app/prop29.go). As requested during the discussion of the governance proposal, the migration and fund recovery procedure verifies all signatures. This code was tested during the cosmoshub-3 simulated upgrade testnet.
```

## Stargate Upgrade Steps

------------
The upgrade steps for the simulated upgrade of the current Cosmoshub mainnet to Cosmos Stargate includes the following steps:

This section is with the current `gaia 2.0.*` implementation.

  1. Validators should set their `gaia` with a halt time of `1611813600`ie. 06:00 UTC on Jan 28th in Unix time.

  2. Validators should then export the current cosmos state with `gaiad export > cosmoshub-3-export.json`

  3. Validators should determine the height of the last block as `last-cosmoshub-3_block`.

  4. Validators should back up their `.gaiad` directory.

> This section is with the upgrade `gaia 3.0.*` implemenataion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section is with the upgraded `gaia 3.0.*` implemenataion.
```

  1. Validators should then migrate the exported genesis state. `gaiad migrate cosmoshub-3-export.json --chain-id=cosmoshub-4 --initial-height [last_cosmoshub-3_block+1] > genesis.json`

>   2. Validators should delete their `~/.gaiad` directory and create a new one with `gaiad init [name]` and then edit their configuration files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. Validators should delete their `~/.gaiad` directory (**ENSURE IT IS BACKED UP**!) and create a new one with `gaiad init [name]` and then edit their configuration files or recover the config files from backups.
```

  3. Validators should then start `cosmoshub-4` with `gaiad start`. Automated audits of the genesis state can take 30-120 min using the crisis module. This can be disabled by `gaiad start --x-crisis-skip-assert-invariants`.

> Validators should expect that at least 16GB of RAM needs to be provisioned to process block 1 on cosmoshub-4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Validators should expect that at least 16GB of RAM needs to be provisioned to process the first new block on cosmoshub-4.
```

## Time of the Upgrade

------------

> We propose scheduling the Cosmoshub-3 to Cosmoshub-4 simulated upgrade for Thursday Jan 28th, 2021 at 0600 UTC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose scheduling the Cosmoshub-3 to Cosmoshub-4 upgrade for Thursday Jan 28th, 2021 at 0600 UTC
```

This is a real upgrade right, not simulated?

- West Coast USA: 10 PM on Jan 27
- East Coast USA: 1 AM on Jan 28
- Central Europe: 7 AM on Jan 28
- Seoul: 5 PM on Jan 28

## The git commit of Gaia that we are upgrading to

------------
`d974b27a8caf8cad3b06fbe4678871e4b0b69a51`

## What we're doing while voting is happening

------------

> We expect that integration partners will be motivated to finish their preperations for the upgrade during the period when the governance proposal is running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We expect that integration partners will be motivated to finish their preparations for the upgrade during the period when the governance proposal is running.
```

A testnet with the final version of Gaia 3.0 will be running to assist with integrations.

> [Stargate Ecosystem Readiness Report](https://github.com/cosmosdevs/stargate/blob/master/ecosystem_readiness.md) is living document. We will be updating this document as we get reports of competed end to end testing. We expect a hard deadline to be movtivating.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Stargate Ecosystem Readiness Report](https://github.com/cosmosdevs/stargate/blob/master/ecosystem_readiness.md) is a living document. We will be updating this document as we get reports of completed end to end testing. We expect a hard deadline to be motivating.
```

## What is the upgrade abort process

------------

There are multiple circumstances where the proposal should be abandoned even if it passes:

1. A critical vulnerability may be found in the software. If the development teams change their recommended version of gaia, the validator set should implicitly abandon this upgrade procedure. A future proposal will be made to the Hub to upgrade to the new target commit.

> 2. The migration process fails could fail to produce a valid cosmoshub-4 genesis file. This would manifest as ad-hoc changes to genesis needed to start or a failure to produce blocks from `cosmoshub-4`. In this case, the validator set should restart cosmoshub-3 at `last-cosmoshub-3_block` and a future governance proposal will be done to initiate another upgrade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The migration process fails to produce a valid cosmoshub-4 genesis file. This would manifest as ad-hoc changes to genesis needed to start or a failure to produce blocks from `cosmoshub-4`. In this case, the validator set should restart cosmoshub-3 at `last-cosmoshub-3_block` and a future governance proposal will be done to initiate another upgrade. For this reason it is critical that validators back up their `.gaiad`.
```

## Stargate Upgrade Steps

------------
The upgrade steps for the simulated upgrade of the current Cosmoshub mainnet to Cosmos Stargate includes the following steps:

This section is with the current `gaia 2.0.*` implementation.

  1. Validators should set their `gaia` with a halt time of `1611813600`ie. 06:00 UTC on Jan 28th in Unix time.

  2. Validators should then export the current cosmos state with `gaiad export > cosmoshub-3-export.json`

  3. Validators should determine the height of the last block as `last-cosmoshub-3_block`.

  4. Validators should back up their `.gaiad` directory.

This section is with the upgraded `gaia 3.0.*` implemenataion.

  1. Validators should then migrate the exported genesis state. `gaiad migrate cosmoshub-3-export.json --chain-id=cosmoshub-4 --initial-height [last_cosmoshub-3_block+1] > genesis.json`

>   2. Validators should delete their `~/.gaiad` directory (**ENSURE IT IS BACKED UP**!) and create a new one with `gaiad init [name]` and then edit their configuration files or recover the config files from backups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  2. Validators should (**AFTER ENSURING IT IS BACKED UP**!) delete their `~/.gaiad` directory and create a new one with `gaiad init [name]` and then edit their configuration files or recover the config files from backups.
```
